Advanced guide for facets (#360)
meilisearch/documentation: guides/advanced_guides/faceted_search.md

When users perform a search, they are presented with a list of results and a list of facets (i.e., categories) as below:

![Amazon UI](/amazon-facets.png)
> Faceted navigation on Amazon: facets are displayed on the left column.

## How does it work?

Faceted search, also known as faceted navigation, is a technique that combines traditional search with a **faceted classification of items**. Data is classified across multiple dimensions, called facets, so it can be accessed and ordered in multiple ways at a time. Document fields are used as categories such as title, author, director, language, description, release date, and so forth.
Besides, faceting is a powerful feature that enables to build an intuitive navigation interface.

Both faceting and filtering help drill down into a subset of search results. However, **faceting differs from [filtering](/guides/advanced_guides/filtering.md)**.

- **Filters** exclude some results based on criteria. They allow users to narrow down a set of documents to only those matching these chosen criteria. In other words, filtering is used to filter the returned results by adding constraints.

> - **Facets** are a subset of filtering. Facets are document fields used as categories and thus provide grouping capabilities to search for specific fields rather than every field. They allow users to narrow down a set of documents by multiple dimensions at a time.

Author: Thx!

This attribute can take two values:

- `[<facetName>, <facetName>, ...]` (Array of strings, defaults to `null`)

  An array of strings that contains the facets for which to retrieve the matching count. The number of remaining candidates for each specified facet is returned. If a facet name doesn't exist, it will be ignored.

- `["*"]`

  The `*` character can also be used. In that case, a count for all facets is returned.

If the `facets` parameter has been set, the returned results will contain two additional fields:

- `facets`: The number of remaining candidates for each specified facet.

- `exhaustiveFacetsCount`:
  Returns `true` if this count is **exhaustive**.
  Otherwise, returns `false` if this count is **approximative**.

### Example

Given a movie database, suppose that you want to know how many Batman movies are classified as `Action and Adventure`, how many of them are classified as `Animation` and what the number of Batman movies per director is. You would use the following CURL command:

```bash
$ curl --get 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
    --data-urlencode 'q=Batman' \
    --data-urlencode 'facets=["genre", "director"]'
```

> ### 2. The facets to filter on

Author: Noted! I update it.

`facetFilters=["facetName:facetValue"]`, `facetFilters=[["facetName:facetValue"]]` or a mix of both `facetFilters=["facetName1:facetValue1", ["facetName2:facetValue2"]]`

- `["facetName1:facetValue1", ["facetName2:facetValue2"]]` (Array of strings or arrays of strings, defaults to `null`)

  Both types of array contain the facet names and values to filter on.
  A valid array must be an array which contains either a list of strings or arrays of strings and can mix both (e.g. `["kind:t-shirt", ["color:red", "color:green"]]`).

  - `facetName`: The name (the attribute) of a field used as a facet (e.g. `color`, `kind`).
  - `facetValue`: The value of this facet to filter results on (e.g. `red`, `green`, `t-shirt`, `pants`).

Inputting a double dimensional array allows you to use **logical connectives**.

- **Inner arrays elements** are connected by an `OR` operator (e.g. `[["color:red", "color:green"]]`).
- **Outer arrays elements** are connected by an `AND` operator (e.g. `["color:red", "kind:t-shirt"]`).

You can mix connectives, for instance, the following array:

```json
[["genre:Horror", "genre:Comedy"], "director:Jordan Peele"]
```

> Can be translated as:

Reviewer: I thinks this is pretty confusing, I would maybe introduce the way it works, before the syntax.

Author: Don't hesitate to tell me if you want to modify/add things! :smile:

```SQL
("genre:Horror" OR "genre:Comedy") AND "director:Jordan Peele"
```

### Example

> Say you want to get movies directed by Jordan Peele and classified as either comedy or horror, you would use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Say you want to get movies matching "thriller" directed by Jordan Peele and classified as either comedy or horror, you would use:
```

![Amazon UI](/amazon-facets.png)
> Faceted navigation on Amazon: facets are displayed on the left column.

## How does it work?

Faceted search, also known as faceted navigation, is a technique that combines traditional search with a **faceted classification of items**.
Setting categorical document attributes as "facet" enable efficient filtering within the different categories. Such categorical attributes are, for example, movie genre, director, or language.
Besides, faceting is a powerful feature that enables to build an intuitive navigation interface.

Both faceting and filtering help drill down into a subset of search results. However, **faceting differs from [filtering](/guides/advanced_guides/filtering.md)**.

- **Filters** exclude some results based on criteria. They allow users to narrow down a set of documents to only those matching these chosen criteria. In other words, filtering is used to filter the returned results by adding constraints.
- **Facets**, on the other hand, are used to categorize the data into subsets that will be search upon: they reduce the number of documents to process.

> Faceting and filtering aim at being complementary;  facets narrows down the set of documents to be  searched upon, while filters reduce the number of documents coming out of a search.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Faceting and filtering aim at being complementary;  facets narrows down the set of documents to be searched upon, while filters reduce the number of documents coming out of a search.
```

      "release_date": 1520035200
  },
  {
      "id": "329996",
      "title": "Dumbo",
      "director": "Tim Burton",
      "genre": "Science fiction",
      "poster": "https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w1280/279PwJAcelI4VuBtdzrZASqDPQr.jpg",
      "overview": "A young elephant, whose oversized ears enable him to fly, helps...",
      "release_date": 1553644800
  },
  {
      "id": "458723",
      "title": "Us",
      "director": "Jordan Peele",
      "genre": "Horror",
      "poster": "https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w1280/ux2dU1jQ2ACIMShzB3yP93Udpzc.jpg",
      "overview": "Husband and wife Gabe and Adelaide Wilson take their...",
      "release_date": 1552521600
  },
  ...
]
```

You would declare faceted attributes as follows:

```bash
$ curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  --data '{
      "attributesForFaceting": [
          "director",
          "genre"
      ]
  }'
```

## Querying On Faceted Attributes

When performing a search, you can specify:

### 1. The facets for which to retrieve the matching count

`facets=[<facetName>, <facetName>, ...]`

This attribute can take two values:

> - `[<facetName>, <facetName>, ...]` (Optional, array of strings, defaults to `null`)

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? I don't understand this sentence.

Author: Yes, you're right. I made some changes to make it more clear!

  An array of strings that contains the facets for which to retrieve the matching count. The number of remaining candidates for each specified facet is returned. If a facet name doesn't exist, it will be ignored.

- `["*"]`

  The `*` character can also be used. In that case, a count for all facets is returned.

If the `facets` parameter has been set, the returned results will contain two additional fields:

- `facets`: The number of remaining candidates for each specified facet.

- `exhaustiveFacetsCount`:

>   Returns `true` if the above count is **exhaustive**.
>   Otherwise, returns `false` if the above count is **approximative**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Returns `true` if this count is **exhaustive**.
  Otherwise, returns `false` if this count is **approximative**.
```

### Example

Given a movie database, suppose that you want to know how many Batman movies are classified as `Action and Adventure`, how many of them are classified as `Animation` and what the number of Batman movies per director is. You would use the following CURL command:

```bash
$ curl --get 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
    --data-urlencode 'q=Batman' \

>     --data-urlencode 'facets=["genre, "director]'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    --data-urlencode 'facets=["genre", "director"]'
```

Author: Thx!

```

### 2. The facets to filter on

> `facetFilters=["facetName:facetValue"]` or `facetFilters=[["facetName:facetValue"]]`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`facetFilters=["facetName:facetValue"]`, `facetFilters=[["facetName:facetValue"]]` or a mix of both `facetFilters=["facetName1:facetValue1", ["facetName2:facetValue2"]]`
```

This attribute can take two types of array:

> - `["facetName:facetValue"]` (Optional, array of strings)
> - `[["facetName:facetValue"]]` (Optional, array of arrays of strings)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `["facetName:facetValue"]` (Optional, array of strings)
- `[["facetName:facetValue"]]` (Optional, array of arrays of strings)
- `["facetName1:facetValue1", ["facetName2:facetValue2"]]` (Optional, array of strings or arrays of strings)
```

Reviewer 2: I am not sur about this part of the document.
We repeat what we already said just above this list and these array forms are useless: Doing an OR with one element is the same as doing an AND and imply a new useless deeper array, this is the same for the new mixed array form I propose...

>   Both types of array contain the facet names and values to filter on.
>   The **array's depth** must be at least equal to **1** and musn't be greater than **2**.

Reviewer 2: I don't feel it really clear, I propose that, but not sure if what I propose is better tho.
```suggestion
  Both types of array contain the facet names and values to filter on.
  A valid array must be an array which contains either a list of strings or arrays of strings and can mix both.
```

Author: It looks clear to me, thx!

>   - `facetName`: The name (the attribute) of a field used as a facet.
>   - `facetValue`: The value of this facet to filter results on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `facetName`: The name (the attribute) of a field used as a facet (e.g. `color`, `kind`).
  - `facetValue`: The value of this facet to filter results on (e.g. `red`, `green`, `t-shirt`, `pant`).
```

Inputting a double dimensional array allows you to use **logical connectives**.

> - **Inner arrays elements** are connected by an `OR` operator.
> - **Outer arrays elements** are connected by an `AND` operator.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Inner arrays elements** are connected by an `OR` operator (e.g. `[["color:red", "color:green"]]`).
- **Outer arrays elements** are connected by an `AND` operator (e.g. `["color:red", "kind:t-shirt"]`).
```

> For instance, the following array:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can mix both operations, for instance, the following array:
```

# Faceted Search

**Faceted search** is a feature provided out-of-the-box by MeiliSearch. Faceting allows classifying search results into categories that are called **facets**.

> > For a movie, its title, its director, or its genre can be used as facets.

Reviewer 2: Could you remove the title here ~and replace it by the authors~, please?

A faceted search system provides users with a simple way to narrow down search results by selecting facets. A faceted navigation system is an **intuitive interface to display and navigate through content**. The facets are placed in the UI as filters which users can apply to refine the results in real-time.
When users perform a search, they are presented with a list of results and a list of facets (i.e., categories) as below:

![Amazon UI](/amazon-facets.png)
> Faceted navigation on Amazon: facets are displayed on the left column.

## How does it work?

Faceted search, also known as faceted navigation, is a technique that combines traditional search with a **faceted classification of items**.
Setting categorical document attributes as "facet" enables efficient filtering within the different categories. Such categorical attributes are, for example, movie genre, director, or language.

> Besides, faceting is a powerful feature that enables to build an intuitive navigation interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides, faceting is a powerful feature that allows building intuitive navigation interfaces.
```

- **Filters** exclude some results based on criteria. They allow users to narrow down a set of documents to only those matching these chosen criteria. In other words, filtering is used to filter the returned results by adding constraints.
- **Facets**, on the other hand, are used to categorize the data into subsets that will be searched upon: they reduce the number of documents to process.

Faceting and filtering aim at being complementary;  facets narrows down the set of documents to be searched upon, while filters reduce the number of documents coming out of a search.

## Setting Up Facets

Document attributes to use as facets **must be declared at indexing time**.

You can set up facets **through the API** via the [global settings route](/references/settings.md#update-settings).
Attributes for which to enable faceting are defined in the `attributesForFaceting` parameter. This parameter accepts an array of strings that specifies which attributes must be used as facets, defaulting to `null`:

`attributesForFaceting=[<Attribute>, ...]`

- `[<Attribute>, ...]` (Array of strings, defaults to `null`)

  An array of strings that contains the attributes to use as facets.

::: warning

> Only fields of data type **string** or **array of strings** used for faceting.

Reviewer 2: can be used ?

Author: Thx!

> Only fields of data type **string** or **array of strings** can be set up as facets.

Reviewer: It is not strictly disallowed as meilisearch does not enforce schema, it will just not work. One should not expect meilisearch to warn him if he uses bad params for faceting

```suggestion
Only fields of data type **string** or **array of strings** used for faceting.
```

      "director": "Tim Burton",
      "genre": "Science fiction",
      "poster": "https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w1280/279PwJAcelI4VuBtdzrZASqDPQr.jpg",
      "overview": "A young elephant, whose oversized ears enable him to fly, helps...",
      "release_date": 1553644800
  },
  {
      "id": "458723",
      "title": "Us",
      "director": "Jordan Peele",
      "genre": "Horror",
      "poster": "https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w1280/ux2dU1jQ2ACIMShzB3yP93Udpzc.jpg",
      "overview": "Husband and wife Gabe and Adelaide Wilson take their...",
      "release_date": 1552521600
  },
  ...
]
```

You would declare faceted attributes as follows:

```bash
$ curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  --data '{
      "attributesForFaceting": [
          "director",
          "genre"
      ]
  }'
```

## Querying On Faceted Attributes

When performing a search, you can pass parameter to your query:

### 1. The facets to filter on

You can filter on facets to narrow down your results based on criteria.

`facetFilters=["facetName:facetValue"]`, `facetFilters=[["facetName:facetValue"]]` or a mix of both `facetFilters=["facetName1:facetValue1", ["facetName2:facetValue2"]]`

> - `["facetName1:facetValue1", ["facetName2:facetValue2"]]` (Array of strings or arrays of strings, defaults to `null`)

Reviewer 2: can we rephrase into: Array of array of strings or single strings

  Both types of array contain the facet names and values to filter on.
  A valid array must be an array which contains either a list of strings or arrays of strings and can mix both (e.g. `["kind:t-shirt", ["color:red", "color:green"]]`).

  - `facetName`: The name (the attribute) of a field used as a facet (e.g. `color`, `kind`).
  - `facetValue`: The value of this facet to filter results on (e.g. `red`, `green`, `t-shirt`, `pants`).

### Example

Given a clothing dataset, suppose you want to retrieve all t-shirts with a nautical pattern. You would then use:

```bash
$ curl --get 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/clothing/search' \
    --data-urlencode 'q=nautical' \
    --data-urlencode 'facetFilters=["kind:t-shirt"]'
```

### Logical Connectives

Inputting a double dimensional array allows you to use **logical connectives**.

- **Inner arrays elements** are connected by an `OR` operator (e.g. `[["color:red", "color:green"]]`).
- **Outer arrays elements** are connected by an `AND` operator (e.g. `["color:red", "kind:t-shirt"]`).

You can mix connectives, for instance, the following array:

> 

Reviewer: not how I imagined it, but it turns out pretty good, GJ!

Author: Thanks! :smile:

Author: Thanks! Don't hesitate to tell me if you want to modify/add things! 😄

```json
["kind:t-shirt", ["color:red", "color:green"]]
```

Can be translated as:

```SQL
"kind:t-shirt" AND ("color:red" OR "color:green")
```

### Example

Say you want to get movies matching "thriller" classified as either comedy or horror and directed by Jordan Peele.

```SQL
("genre:Horror" OR "genre:Comedy") AND "director:Jordan Peele"
```

> Querying on `thriller`, the above example results in the following CURL command:

Reviewer 2: Why backticks here but not on the above sentence?

Author: Yes, you're right! I update them!

```bash
$ curl --get 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
    --data-urlencode 'q=thriller' \
    --data-urlencode 'facetFilters=[["genre:Horror", "genre:Comedy"], "director:Jordan Peele"]'
```

> ### 2. The facets for which to retrieve the matching count

Reviewer 3: This section is not clear and I don't think it means what it should mean. 

```suggestion
### 2. The facets distribution
```
The `facets` parameter returns an object containing the number of matching documents distributed amongst all the values of a given facet. 

For example, when searching for `Batman`, the `facets` on `genre` may look like this: 
```json
{
  "facets": {
    "genre": {
      "thriller": 158,
      "comedy": 5,
      "romantic": 0
    }
  }
}
```
This mean that 158 documents containing the query `Batman` has the `thriller` genre, 5 have the `comedy` genre. While zero romantic movies have been found containing that same query. If the user is searching for a `comedy` movie around batman, he would use the `facetFilter` to narrow its search by only allowing the `comedy` genre and only the 5 matching document would be returned.

> The user uses this information to further its search in one or the other direction by using the `facetFilters`

### Use Cases

<img width="309" alt="Screenshot 2020-05-25 at 11 13 58" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/33010418/82799411-4cce2b00-9e7a-11ea-9e32-624c247f2c47.png">

> Example when looking for categories on the [snowleader.co.uk website](https://www.snowleader.co.uk/en/catalogsearch/result/?universes-selector=all&q=boot)

In the example above, when searching for `Boots`, the `facets` inform us that 791 `outdoor` boots have been found in the `categories` facets. 

Another example on the `size` facet.
<img width="330" alt="Screenshot 2020-05-25 at 14 21 46" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/33010418/82812340-1cdf5180-9e93-11ea-9945-792608d2cc67.png">
The user can narrow down its selection to all the pants available in `XXL` size. Thus not wasting time looking at pants not available in its size.

### Usage Examples

The `return` object si important in this selection. I will complete this section once I have the appropriate dataset

You can retrieve the count of matching terms for each facet.

`facets=[<facetName>, <facetName>, ...]`

This attribute can take two values:

> - `[<facetName>, <facetName>, ...]` (Array of strings, defaults to `null`)

Reviewer 2: Can we remove the "defaults to `null`" part please?

  An array of strings that contains the facets for which to retrieve the matching count. The number of remaining candidates for each specified facet is returned. If a facet name doesn't exist, it will be ignored.

- `["*"]`

  The `*` character can also be used. In that case, a count for all facets is returned.

If the `facets` parameter has been set, the returned results will contain two additional fields:

- `facets`: The number of remaining candidates for each specified facet.

- `exhaustiveFacetsCount`:
  Returns `true` if this count is **exhaustive**.
  Otherwise, returns `false` if this count is **approximative**.

> ### Example

Reviewer 3: This section should be more elaborate. 
1. Add the attributes to the attributesForFacetting
2. Search example (you did this)
3. Response example

[Learn more about `facetsDistribution` in the search parameters](/guides/advanced_guides/search_parameters.md#the-facets-distribution)

## Walkthrough

Follow these steps to get started with faceting.

Suppose that you manage a movie database. The first thing to do is to declare faceted attributes as follows:

```bash
$ curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  --data '{
      "attributesForFaceting": [
          "director",
          "producer",
          "genres",
          "production_companies"
      ]
  }'
```

In the above example, `director`, `producer`, `genres` and `production_companies` will be used as facets.

You can now search your documents and use query parameters.

You can filter on facets. For instance, say you want to get movies matching "thriller" classified as either horror **or** mystery **and** directed by Jordan Peele. You have to use the following CURL command:

```bash
$ curl --get 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
    --data-urlencode 'q=thriller' \
    --data-urlencode 'facetFilters=[["genres:Horror", "genres:Mystery"], "director:Jordan Peele"]'
```

You will get the following response:

```json

> [

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"hits": [
```

    "production_companies": [
      "Monkeypaw Productions"
    ],
...
  },
  {
    "id": 419430,
    "title": "Get Out",
    "director": "Jordan Peele",
    "genres": [
      "Mystery",
      "Thriller",
      "Horror"
    ],
    "overview": "Chris and his girlfriend Rose go upstate to visit her parents for the weekend. At first, Chris reads the family's overly accommodating behavior as nervous attempts to deal with their daughter's interracial relationship, but as the weekend progresses, a series of increasingly disturbing discoveries lead him to a truth that he never could have imagined.",
    "production_companies": [
      "Monkeypaw Productions"
    ],
...
  }
],
"offset": 0,
"limit": 20,
"nbHits": 2,
"exhaustiveNbHits": false,
"processingTimeMs": 4,
"query": "thriller"
```

Now, if you want to know what the number of Batman movies per genre is, you have to use the following CURL command:

```bash
$ curl --get 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
    --data-urlencode 'q=Batman' \
    --data-urlencode 'facetsDistribution=["genres"]'
```

You will get the following response:

```json

> [

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"hits": [
```

Reviewer 2: @bidoubiwa Would it be possible in a futur (futur) version of the CI to check code snippets anotatted as JSON for example? I know the `...` will not pass, but we will remove them.

      "overview": "Husband and wife Gabe and Adelaide Wilson take their...",
      "release_date": 1552521600
  },
  ...
]
```

To be able to facet search on `director` and `genre`, you would declare faceted attributes as follows:

```bash
$ curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  --data '{
      "attributesForFaceting": [
          "director",
          "genres"
      ]
  }'
```

## Using facets

By introducing facets to MeiliSearch, new search query parameters were also added:

- `facetFilters`:  Narrows the selection on which to search.
- `facetsDistribution`: Returns the number of matching documents distributed amongst all the values of a given facet.

### The facet filters

Because facets relate specifically to a set of documents, they give an overview of the records and help to understand what kind of information can be searched. Facets then help users navigate through their search results.

![Amazon movies](/faceted-search/facets-akira.png)
> You can select multiple categories on Amazon.

They can filter on facets to narrow down their results based on criteria with the `facetFilters` attribute.

> [Learn more about `facetFilters` in the search parameters](/guides/advanced_guides/search_parameters.md#facet-filters)

Reviewer 3: Should be the opposite.

### The facets distribution

> Since the users can have a visual clue about the range of categories available in the UI, they can easily know how many search results are found for each category.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Facet distribution returns the number of matching documents distributed amongst all the values of a given facet. 

> After a search in a movie dataset, the number of films found in all the different genres is the facet distribution of the `genres` facet.
```
I moved your sentence below the screenshot for context

> In the example below, on [IMDb](https://www.imdb.com), the number in parentheses matches how many search results each facet relates to.

Reviewer 3: > how many search results each facet relates to

I have difficulties understanding this

Author: What do you think?

```suggestion
In the example below, on [IMDb](https://www.imdb.com), the number in parentheses represents the number of search results each facet relates to.
```

Reviewer 3: It is the 
> relates to 
part that I don't understand

Author: It means the count associated to one facet. I can use the word associated instead of relate?

![IMDb facets](/faceted-search/facets-imdb.png)
> If a user searches Fantasy, Animation, Adventure movies, and TV shows, they will know there are 826 TV series and 137 video games matching their criteria.

> To get the facets distribution, you have to specify a list of facets for which to retrieve the count of matching documents using the `facetsDistribution` attribute.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since the users can have a visual clue about the range of categories available in the UI, they can easily know how many search results are found for each category.

To get the facets distribution, you have to specify a list of facets for which to retrieve the count of matching documents using the `facetsDistribution` attribute.
```

## Walkthrough

Follow these steps to get started with faceting.

Suppose that you manage a movie database. The first thing to do is to declare faceted attributes as follows:

```bash
$ curl \
  -X POST 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/settings' \
  --data '{
      "attributesForFaceting": [
          "director",
          "producer",
          "genres",
          "production_companies"
      ]
  }'
```

In the above example, `director`, `producer`, `genres` and `production_companies` will be used as facets.

You can now search your documents and use query parameters.

You can filter on facets. For instance, say you want to get movies matching "thriller" classified as either horror **or** mystery **and** directed by Jordan Peele. You have to use the following CURL command:

```bash
$ curl --get 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
    --data-urlencode 'q=thriller' \
    --data-urlencode 'facetFilters=[["genres:Horror", "genres:Mystery"], "director:Jordan Peele"]'
```

You will get the following response:

```json
[
  {
    "id": 458723,
    "title": "Us",
    "director": "Jordan Peele",

>     "producer": "Sean McKittrick",
>     "tagline": "Watch yourself",

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: cleanup

    "genres": [
      "Thriller",
      "Horror",
      "Mystery"
    ],
    "overview": "Husband and wife Gabe and Adelaide Wilson take their kids to their beach house expecting to unplug and unwind with friends. But as night descends, their serenity turns to tension and chaos when some shocking visitors arrive uninvited.",

>     "cast": [
>       "Lupita Nyong'o as Adelaide Wilson / Red",
>       "Winston Duke as Gabriel \"Gabe\" Wilson / Abraham"
>     ],

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: cleanup

    "production_companies": [
      "Monkeypaw Productions"
    ],

>     "vote_count": 3000,
>     "vote_average": 7,
>     "poster_path": "https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w500/ux2dU1jQ2ACIMShzB3yP93Udpzc.jpg",
>     "popularity": 22.897,
>     "release_date": 1552521600

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
...
```

Reviewer 3: cleanup and dots to suggest simplificatiob

  },
  {
    "id": 419430,
    "title": "Get Out",
    "director": "Jordan Peele",

>     "producer": "Sean McKittrick",
>     "tagline": "Just because you're invited, doesn't mean you're welcome.",

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: cleanup

    "genres": [
      "Mystery",
      "Thriller",
      "Horror"
    ],
    "overview": "Chris and his girlfriend Rose go upstate to visit her parents for the weekend. At first, Chris reads the family's overly accommodating behavior as nervous attempts to deal with their daughter's interracial relationship, but as the weekend progresses, a series of increasingly disturbing discoveries lead him to a truth that he never could have imagined.",

>     "cast": [
>       "Daniel Kaluuya as Chris Washington",
>       "Allison Williams as Rose Armitage"
>     ],

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: cleanup

    "production_companies": [
      "Monkeypaw Productions"
    ],

>     "vote_count": 9738,
>     "vote_average": 7.5,
>     "poster_path": "https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w500/rdPGUJhadPg7FGFNzavib0iwTor.jpg",
>     "popularity": 28.295,
>     "release_date": 1487894400

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
...
```

Reviewer 3: cleanup

  }
],
"offset": 0,
"limit": 20,
"nbHits": 2,
"exhaustiveNbHits": false,
"processingTimeMs": 4,
"query": "thriller"
```

Now, if you want to know what the number of Batman movies per genre is, you have to use the following CURL command:

```bash
$ curl --get 'http://localhost:7700/indexes/movies/search' \
    --data-urlencode 'q=Batman' \
    --data-urlencode 'facetsDistribution=["genres"]'
```

You will get the following response:

```json
[
  {
    "id": 2661,
    "title": "Batman",
    "director": "Leslie H. Martinson",

>     "producer": "William Dozier",
>     "tagline": "He's Here Big As Life In A Real Bat-Epic",

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    "genres": [
      "Adventure",
      "Comedy"
    ],
    "overview": "The Dynamic Duo faces four super-villains who plan to hold the world for ransom with the help of a secret invention that instantly dehydrates people.",

>     "cast": [
>       "Adam West as Batman / Bruce Wayne",
>       "Burt Ward as Robin / Dick Grayson"
>       ],

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    "production_companies": [
      "DC Comics"
    ],

>     "vote_count": 404,
>     "vote_average": 6.2,
>     "poster_path": "https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w500/udDVJXtAFsQ8DimrXkVFqy4DGEQ.jpg",
>     "popularity": 8.11,
>     "release_date": -108086400

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
...
```

cleanup and dots to suggest simplification

  },
  {
    "id": 268,
    "title": "Batman",
    "director": "Tim Burton",

>     "producer": "Peter Guber",
>     "tagline": "Have you ever danced with the devil in the pale moonlight?",

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    "genres": [
      "Fantasy",
      "Action"
    ],
    "overview": "The Dark Knight of Gotham City begins his war on crime with his first major enemy being the clownishly homicidal Joker, who has seized control of Gotham's underworld.",

>     "cast": [
>       "Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman",
>       "Jack Nicholson as Jack Napier / The Joker"
>     ],

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

    "production_companies": [
      "PolyGram Filmed Entertainment"
    ],

>     "vote_count": 4264,
>     "vote_average": 7.1,
>     "poster_path": "https://image.tmdb.org/t/p/w500/kBf3g9crrADGMc2AMAMlLBgSm2h.jpg",
>     "popularity": 19.538,
>     "release_date": 614563200

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
...
```

cleanup and dots to suggest simplificatiob

# Faceted Search

Faceted search is a feature provided out-of-the-box by MeiliSearch. Faceting allows to classify search results into categories that are called **facets**.

> For a movie, its title, director, and its release date can be used as facets.

The user can then narrow down search results by selecting facets, which is similar to applying filters to refine the results.

Both faceting and filtering help narrow down the search results. However, **faceting differs from [filtering](/guides/advanced_guides/filtering.md)**.

Faceted attributes **must be declared at indexing time**.

> 

Reviewer: I really really would like a small paragraph on how facets work 🙏

> ## Using Facets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Setting Up Facets
```

Author: Cannot commit this suggestion so I add it locally.

In order to implement the all new facets, we at meilisearch have added a new attribute `attributesForFaceting`. With the default value of `Null` it accepts `[String]`.
It should be noted that passing an empty array will recet all faceting attribute in other words any call to settings with a value for the attribute attributesForFaceting overwrites the currently set faceting attributes.

> A call to [POST]/indexes/:index_uid/settings should list the currently set facets.

Reviewer: As a general rule of thumb, in a spec, thing "should" do something, but in  documentation, things "do" things :)

```suggestion
A call to [POST]/indexes/:index_uid/settings lists the currently set facets.
```

> ## Using Search Query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using Facets In A Search Query
```

> When doing a search query, you can specify:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When performing a search, you can specify:
```

> 1. The facets to filter on with the facet syntax (explained below), thanks to the optional parameter facetFilters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The facets to filter on with the facet syntax (explained below), thanks to the optional parameter `facetFilters`.
```

> 2. the facets for which to retrieve the matching count for, with the facets optional parameter.

Reviewer: This is unclear, and I think we can blame my specs for that. What we want to say is that `facets` return the number of remaining candidates for each specified facet

```suggestion
2. the facets for which to retrieve the matching count for, with the `facets` optional parameter.
```

## Syntax

> The syntax for passing arguements through facetFilters is `["facetName:facetValue"] or [["FacetName:FacetValue"]]`

Reviewer: I see that you explain everything bellow, but I'd rather you explained thoroughly how it works in this section. This way  we can keep the example section for actual example, using curl commands, the way we usually do.

### Example

`[["color:red", "color:blue"], "kind:t-shirt"] <=> ("color:red" OR "color:blue") AND "kind:t-shirt"`
inner arrays elements are `OR`ed together, outer array elements are `AND`ed together.
> Array depth must not be greater than 2, and be at least 1.

Errors are sent to the user on:

  1. Incorrect syntax usage`[["color:red"]]` and `["color:red"]` are examples correct syntax while `"color:red"` is incorrect.
  2. Faceting on existing facets. It is asked of the user to do faceting on an unregistered or not existing facet. (we could send the list of existing facets to the user).

The facets accepts a `[String]` containing all the facets for which we want to retrieve count information. It defaults to `Null`. If it is set to `["*"]`, counts for all facets set above will be returned. It will return facets based on a best effort to match the user request. If a facet name is not existing it will be ignored.

## Additional fields

The result of the search query contains two additional fields if the `facets` parameter has been set:

  1. `Facets`: returning a count of candidates for each requested facets in the facets parameter, if set to `[*]` a count for all facets is returned.

>   2. `ExhaustiveFacetsCount` telling whether the above count is exhaustive or approximative.

Reviewer: this overall does not work... Best would be a simple curl example illustrating a use-case. 

> `[["color:red", "color:blue"], "kind:t-shirt"] <=> ("color:red" OR "color:blue") AND "kind:t-shirt"`

this belongs to the previous section,  for instance. Nothing fundamentally new should be explained in the examples.

When performing a search, you can specify:

### The facets for which to retrieve the matching count

`facets=[<facetName>, <facetName>, ...]`

This attribute can take two values:

- `[<facetName>, <facetName>, ...]` (Optional, array of strings, defaults to `null`)

  Comma-separated list of facets for which to retrieve the matching count. The number of remaining candidates for each specified facet is returned. If a facet name doesn't exist, it will be ignored.

- `["*"]`

  The `*` character can also be used. In that case, a count for all facets is returned.

If the `facets` parameter has been set, the returned results will contain two additional fields:

1. `facets`: The number of remaining candidates for each specified facet.

> 2. `exhaustiveFacetsCount`: Whether the above count is **exhaustive** or **approximative**.

Reviewer 2: We should enumerate the possible values it can take (i.e. `true` or `false`) :)

Author: Thanks!

### The facets to filter on

`facetFilters=["facetName:facetValue"]` or `facetFilters=[["facetName:facetValue"]]`

- `["facetName:facetValue"]` (Optional, array of strings)

  An array of strings that contains the facet names and values to filter on.

  - `facetName`: The attribute (the name) of a field used as a facet.
  - `facetValue`: The value of this facet to filter results on.

`[["color:red", "color:blue"], "kind:t-shirt"] <=> ("color:red" OR "color:blue") AND "kind:t-shirt"`
inner arrays elements are `OR`ed together, outer array elements are `AND`ed together.
> Array depth must not be greater than 2, and be at least 1.

Errors are sent to the user on:

> 1. Incorrect syntax usage`[["color:red"]]` and `["color:red"]` are examples correct syntax while `"color:red"` is incorrect.

Reviewer 2: We should probably not list **valid** syntax here because we are talking about invalid ones.

Author: This is an outdated version. The page is still WIP so there may be conflicts.

> 2. Faceting on existing facets. It is asked of the user to do faceting on an unregistered or not existing facet. (we could send the list of existing facets to the user).

Reviewer 2: "Faceting on existing facets" is not an error.

### The facet filters

Because facets relate specifically to a set of documents, they give an overview of the records and help to understand what kind of information can be searched. Facets then help users navigate through their search results.

They can filter on facets to narrow down their results based on criteria with the `facetFilters` attribute.
Learn more about `facetFilters` in **[the search parameters](/guides/advanced_guides/search_parameters.md#facet-filters)**.

### The facets distribution

Since the users can have a visual clue about the range of categories available in the UI, they can easily know how many search results are found for each category.

In the example below, on the [snowleader.co.uk website](https://www.snowleader.co.uk), the number in parentheses matches how many search results each facet relates to.

![snowleader ski pants](/faceted-search/facets-dist-pants.png)

> > If a user is looking for ski pants available in XXL size, they can select the right size. Thus they won't waste their time looking at items they are not interested in buying.

Reviewer 2: It would probably be better to find another example more related to movies :)

Author: Yes, you're right! I updated it to align all examples.

  Both types of array contain the facet names and values to filter on.
  A valid array must be an array which contains either a list of strings or arrays of strings and can mix both (e.g. `["kind:t-shirt", ["color:red", "color:green"]]`).

  - `facetName`: The name (the attribute) of a field used as a facet (e.g. `color`, `kind`).

>   - `facetValue`: The value of this facet to filter results on (e.g. `red`, `green`, `t-shirt`, `pant`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - `facetValue`: The value of this facet to filter results on (e.g. `red`, `green`, `t-shirt`, `pants`).
```
